Bus Inf Syst Eng 64(6):707–728 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12599-022-00745-z

RESEARCH PAPER

Design Knowledge for Deep-Learning-Enabled Image-Based
Decision Support Systems
Evidence From Power Line Maintenance Decision-Making
Julius Peter Landwehr • Niklas Kühl • Jannis Walk • Mario Gnädig

Received: 6 November 2020 / Accepted: 15 December 2021 / Published online: 1 April 2022
Ó The Author(s) 2022

Abstract With the ever-increasing societal dependence on
electricity, one of the critical tasks in power supply is
maintaining the power line infrastructure. In the process of
making informed, cost-effective, and timely decisions,
maintenance engineers must rely on human-created,
heterogeneous, structured, and also largely unstructured
information. The maturing research on vision-based power
line inspection driven by advancements in deep learning
offers first possibilities to move towards more holistic,
automated, and safe decision-making. However, (current)
research focuses solely on the extraction of information
rather than its implementation in decision-making processes. The paper addresses this shortcoming by designing,
instantiating, and evaluating a holistic deep-learning-enabled image-based decision support system artifact for
power line maintenance at a German distribution system
operator in southern Germany. Following the design science research paradigm, two main components of the
artifact are designed: A deep-learning-based model

Accepted after 2 revisions by Natalia Kliewer.
J. P. Landwehr  N. Kühl (&)  J. Walk
Institute of Information Systems and Marketing (IISM) /
Karlsruhe Service Research Institute (KSRI), Kaiserstraße 89,
76133 Karlsruhe, Germany
e-mail: niklas.kuehl@kit.edu
J. P. Landwehr
e-mail: julius.landwehr@alumni.kit.edu
J. Walk
e-mail: jannis.walk@kit.edu
M. Gnädig
Netze BW GmbH, Schelmenwasenstraße 15, 70567 Stuttgart,
Germany
e-mail: m.gnaedig@netze-bw.de
Published online: 01 April 2022

component responsible for automatic fault detection of
power line parts as well as a user-oriented interface
responsible for presenting the captured information in a
way that enables more informed decisions. As a basis for
both components, preliminary design requirements are
derived from literature and the application field. Drawing
on justificatory knowledge from deep learning as well as
decision support systems, tentative design principles are
derived. Based on these design principles, a prototype of
the artifact is implemented that allows for rigorous evaluation of the design knowledge in multiple evaluation episodes, covering different angles. Through a technical
experiment the technical novelty of the artifact’s capability
to capture selected faults (regarding insulators and safety
pins) in unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV)-captured image
data (model component) is validated. Subsequent interviews, surveys, and workshops in a natural environment
confirm the usefulness of the model as well as the user
interface component. The evaluation provides evidence
that (1) the image processing approach manages to address
the gap of power line component inspection and (2) that the
proposed holistic design knowledge for image-based
decision support systems enables more informed decisionmaking. The paper therefore contributes to research and
practice in three ways. First, the technical feasibility to
detect certain maintenance-intensive parts of power lines
with the help of unique UAV image data is shown. Second,
the distribution system operators’ specific problem is
solved by supporting decisions in maintenance with the
proposed image-based decision support system. Third,
precise design knowledge for image-based decision support
systems is formulated that can inform future system
designs of a similar nature.

123

708

J. P. Landwehr et al.: Design Knowledge for Image-based Decision Support Systems, Bus Inf Syst Eng 64(6):707–728 (2022)

Keywords Decision support system  Design science
research  Computer vision  Infrastructure inspection and
maintenance  Power line  Deep learning

1 Introduction
With modern-day societies increasingly relying on electrical power, the importance of continuous electricity
supply cannot be overlooked. Continuous power supply has
two central building blocks – the electricity generation as
well as its transmission and distribution to the consumer.
From the perspective of transmission or distribution system
operators, the maintenance program of the power line
infrastructure is crucial in avoiding unexpected disruptions.
These system operators have typically adopted conditionbased maintenance programs to minimize the probability of
equipment breakdowns (Pagnano et al. 2013; Jalil et al.
2019). Condition-based maintenance is considered as a
three-step process of data acquisition, data processing, and
maintenance decision-making (Jardine et al. 2006), with
the last step integrally including maintenance order planning (Gopalakrishnan et al. 2015).
Assessing the condition of the components in an electricity network includes inspecting towers or poles with
their connected components, conducting power lines, and
the surrounding vegetation of the two previous elements, as
it can cause short circuits. Operators routinely examine
these aspects regarding faults. Based on the operator’s
composed inspection reports, maintenance engineers need
to compile situation-dependent, well-defined, complete,
and prioritized maintenance orders. This requires the consideration of several other factors, such as infrastructure
topology, available workforce and skill sets, scheduled
infrastructure revision projects, and bundling of maintenance orders. Fast and accurate inspection as well as
complete and exhaustive data and information dissemination are crucial for efficient maintenance decision-making
and can reduce the risk of power outages due to component
failures, increasing the reliability of electricity supply.
Traditionally, the inspection is performed through
human visual observation by means of manual ground
inspection, helicopter-based patrolling, and tower climbing. These inspection methods are costly, time consuming,
partly hazardous, do not comprehensively capture data, and
are hardly scalable. Recent technical advances in the fields
of unmanned aerial vehicles and image processing or
computer vision1 have spurred the development of automated power line inspection. Specifically, deep learning
1

Note that we will use the term image processing and computer
vision interchangeably, as there is no common agreement between the
boundaries of the two terms (Gonzalez and Woods 2018).

123

has proven to boost the performance of image processing
applications (LeCun et al. 2015) – converging towards
human level performance or even surpassing humans (He
et al. 2015b). Researchers are therefore increasingly
focusing on the automatic vision-based detection of components and the immediate diagnosis of faults in the
inspection of power lines (Liu et al. 2020) leaving only the
eventual maintenance decision-making for human
handling.
Previous research on power line maintenance has been
scattered, focusing on the technical building blocks. Today,
the majority of studies either focus on performing
unmanned aerial vehicle inspection flights autonomously
(Hui et al. 2018) (data acquisition), on task-specific image
processing approaches for component detection and fault
diagnosis (Nguyen et al. 2018) (data processing), or on
orchestrating the various technical components (Huang
et al. 2018; Homma et al. 2017) (interplay between data
acquisition and processing). So far, little effort has been
devoted to holistic and end-to-end considerations establishing a relationship between the solely technical problems of automating the data acquisition and processing and
the need for integrating and transferring the acquired data
and extracted information into maintenance decisionmaking. To this end, we conduct a project to design and
evaluate a suitable decision support system following the
design science research paradigm (Hevner 2007) and its
common research guidelines (March and Smith 1995;
Winter 2008). We address the ever-increasing need for
maintaining the impeccable condition of power lines, and
consequently the reliability of electricity supply. We do so
by utilizing available technological possibilities for holistic
vision-based applications to provide decision support in
scoping and planning maintenance orders for maintenance
engineers through improved data and information quality.
We focus on addressing this need by answering the following research question (RQ):
How can an automated, efficient, and useful visionbased power line maintenance decision support system be designed?
By answering this question, we unlock the still largely
unregarded and nascent problem class of image-based
decision support systems, which we believe to be the higher
level abstraction for our specific vision-based power line
maintenance decision support system. In particular, following the dual mission of design science research of
developing usable artifacts for practice and generating
theoretical knowledge for the knowledge base (Gregor and
Jones 2007), we initially explore the challenges and issues
of power line maintenance to derive a number of design
requirements for image-based decision support systems.
Subsequently, we conceptualize design principles based on

J. P. Landwehr et al.: Design Knowledge for Image-based Decision Support Systems, Bus Inf Syst Eng 64(6):707–728 (2022)

justificatory knowledge from image processing and deep
learning. Based on these design principles, we obtain a
number of design features to be used as our application
domain specific design for the image-based decision
support system for vision-based maintenance of power
line components. We instantiate these design features into
a concrete artifact that allows us to rigorously evaluate the
proposed design knowledge in practice.
The remainder of this work is structured as follows:
Sect. 2 summarizes the existing relevant literature. Next, in
Sect. 3, we introduce the research methodology. In Sect. 4,
we conceptualize our design knowledge for image-based
decision support systems, before we introduce the developed artifact as well as its various evaluations in Sect. 5.
Finally, in Sect. 6, we discuss our research findings, reflect
on the limitations of our work, and provide an outlook for
future studies.

709

DL is able to better deal with large-scale, noisy, and
unstructured data.
The exact amount and size of layers is a design choice
such that ideal architecture for a given problem and its data
must be found through experimentation (Goodfellow et al.
2016). Each layer is subject to learning and computes nonlinear input-output mappings which enables a DL model to
represent extremely intricate functions of its input (LeCun
et al. 2015).
Due to these capabilities, DL has brought breakthroughs
in processing images, videos and audio like speech (LeCun
et al. 2015). In particular, Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) a class of DL algorithms which excel at learning
hierarchical features (Janiesch et al. 2021), are especially
suited for the application to feature-rich data – like images.
Therefore, DL is a promising candidate for applications
within the field of CV.
2.2 Computer Vision-Based Infrastructure Inspection

2 Related Work
To determine the potential of extensively captured images
of power line components (PLCs), we review related work
and the literature background in several fields. First, we
briefly introduce foundations regarding deep learning (DL)
Sect. 2.1. In Sect. 2.2, we present how computer vision
(CV) is used for infrastructure inspection in different
application domains. Subsequently, in Sect. 2.3, we present
related work regarding automated vision-based power line
inspection using UAV-captured images. Afterwards, in
Sect. 2.4, we examine image-based decision support systems (IB-DSS) as a way to harness images in efficient
decision-making. We conclude this section by synthesizing
the presented literature and depicting our research gap in
Sect. 2.5.
2.1 Deep Learning
Within the past decade, machine learning has shown significant results solving complex problems – both in theory
as well as in application within industry (Brynjolfsson and
Mcafee 2017). Especially in the field of DL,2 a family of
algorithms solely based on artificial neural networks with
multiple hidden layers, the developments grew rapidly
(Bharati and Pramanik 2020).
DL overcomes a general limitation of machine learning
to handcraft appropriate features in order to find and learn
patterns in input data. The advanced architecture gives DL
the capability to automate feature learning and consequently reduce human effort (Janiesch et al. 2021). Hence,
2

For a general introduction into machine learning and deep learning,
we refer the interested reader to Janiesch et al. (2021).

CV aims to equip computers with visual perception skills
similar to the human ones (Szeliski 2010). CV models
based on DL have led to a significant increase in performance – DL models have even been proven to surpass
human-level performance for specific applications (He
et al. 2015b). Typically, four different CV tasks are distinguished on static images (Griebel et al. 2019): in image
classification the whole image is assigned a class label.
Object detection additionally outputs an approximate
location of the object of interest. Semantic segmentation
produces even more fine-granular information, as each
pixel is assigned a class label. In the specific case of instance segmentation, neighboring objects of the same class
are distinguished additionally.
In the past years, several specific architectures have
been developed to allow for these different CV tasks.
While the two main optimization criteria are the accuracy
of the prediction and the time inferred to obtain the solution ever more tailored solutions building on CNNs are
being developed recently. Architectures such as VGG16
(Simonyan and Zisserman 2015) and ResNet (He et al.
2015a) for image classification and Faster R-CNN (Ren
et al. 2015) and SSD (Liu et al. 2016) for object detection
have proven to provide good accuracy at resonable inference time.
CV is utilized for infrastructure inspection in many
application domains. The typical challenges addressed with
CV in this area are cases where large amounts of physical
objects are to be inspected and they are geographically
remote and / or dispersed. Selected research articles are
presented in the following and summarized in Table 1.
A major application area is road surface inspection and
maintenance. Roads in bad condition can ultimately result

123

710

J. P. Landwehr et al.: Design Knowledge for Image-based Decision Support Systems, Bus Inf Syst Eng 64(6):707–728 (2022)

Table 1 Deep-learning-based power line inspection approaches to detect and diagnose multiple components and similar approaches from other
application domains
Articles

Application
domain

Component detection
Components

Method

Components

Method

Chatterjee
et al. (2018)

Road
surface
inspection

Road

Graph-based
hierarchical
clustering

Road cracks

Multiple
machine
learning
classifiers

Shihavuddin
et al. (2019)

Wind
turbine
blade
inspection

Leading edge erosion, vortex generator panel,
vortex general panel with missing teeth, lightning
receptor

Faster
R-CNN

Fault diagnosis
treated as
detection task

x

Wei et al.
(2019)

Railway
track
inspection

Railway track fastener

Faster
R-CNN

Fault diagnosis
treated as
detection task

x

Zhu et al.
(2018)

Powerline
inspection

Spacer, bird nest, insulator, damper, tower plate,
tower

Cascaded
Faster
R-CNN

–

–

x

Nguyen
et al. (2019)

Powerline
inspection

Pole, cross-arm, insulators

Cascaded
Faster
R-CNN/SSD/
Yolo

Insulator, pole,
top cap, crossarm

ResNet50

x

Liang et al.
(2020)

Powerline
inspection

Defect tower foundation, insulator, grading ring,
contact terminal, triple-plate, earth wire, bird
thorn, bird nest, foreign body

Faster RCNN

Fault diagnosis
treated as
detection task

Our work

Powerline
inspection

Insulator, bird nest, fitting, safety pin

Cascaded
Faster RCNN/SSD

Safety pin

in more accidents and higher costs (Baladi et al. 2017;
Gleave et al. 2014). Thus, CV is utilized to automatically
assess road surface condition and derive necessary maintenance actions. Over the last years this became possible
without expensive, specialized hardware (compare, e.g.,
Quintana et al. 2016). Chatterjee et al. (2018) show how
machine learning-based CV can be used to detect road
surface cracks and develop a ‘‘vision-based DSS for crack
detection’’. They offer first insights into a nascent design
theory for the application case of road crack detection on
the basis of images.
Not only roads, but also railways need to be inspected
periodically to ensure safe transports. Wei et al. (2019)
employ a Faster R-CNN to detect defects of railway track
fasteners. Gibert et al. (2017) propose a CNN-based multitask learning approach that detects railway track fasteners
and crossties and classifies the state of these components.
Wind turbine blades are another physical object of
interest for CV-based infrastructure inspection. Akhloufi
and Benmesbah (2014) present a CV approach to identify
ice accreation on wind turbine blades. Ice accreation can
require a maintenance action since it can cause malfunction
and premature wear and is a safety hazard for nearby
people and infrastructure like roads and powerlines.

123

Fault diagnosis

Design
focus
U

x

ResNet50

U

Shihavuddin et al. (2019) show how faults like leading
edge erosion can be detected with a Faster R-CNN on wind
turbine blades.
2.3 Automated UAV Vision-Based Approaches
for Power Line Inspection
In this work, we are particularly interested in CV solutions
for power line inspection relying on UAV images. From a
component-based view, power line inspection can be
divided into four major categories: towers or poles, insulators, conductors, and fittings (Liu et al. 2020). Each of
these categories contains several subcomponents (Nguyen
et al. 2018) that typically vary in size, kind, and material
according to the voltage level. For instance, some part of a
distribution network with low voltage might have wooden
poles, small standing insulators, and a single, relatively thin
conductor. On the other hand, transmission networks usually have lattice steel towers, large suspending insulators,
and thicker conductors. Several studies have been published that utilize various potential platforms (e.g., helicopter, satellite, and UAV) to collect different data types
(e.g., optical images, laser scanner data, thermal images,
and synthetic aperture radar images) and analyzed these

J. P. Landwehr et al.: Design Knowledge for Image-based Decision Support Systems, Bus Inf Syst Eng 64(6):707–728 (2022)

through different processing techniques (Matikainen et al.
2016). The vision-based approach – with image data from
the visible spectrum captured by UAVs and automatically
analyzed through image processing capabilities – has
gained the most attention and traction in the power line
inspection research domain (Liu et al. 2020).
With a few exceptions, automated vision-based power
line inspection based on UAV-captured images requires
two inherently related tasks (Liu et al. 2020): component
detection and localization as well as fault diagnosis. The
exceptions relate to objects such as bird nests, whose
detection already represents a fault. Previous research
applying image processing for the detection and fault
diagnosis of PLCs is numerous (Mirallès et al. 2014). Liu
et al. (2020) identify several characteristics and shortcomings of previous studies using UAV-captured images in
their exhaustive literature review. Most studies in the field
of vision-based inspection of power lines focus on the
insulator and its faults (Liu et al. 2020) – mainly missing
caps (e.g., Sampedro Pérez et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2019;
Zhai et al. 2018) – while little attention has been paid to
other components. The safety pin that prevents other
components from loosening and falling is the smallest
object in the power line and has, despite its importance,
received little attention and has only been regarded in fault
diagnosis but not in the detection step. Finally, both Liu
et al. (2020) and Nguyen et al. (2018) conclude that the
mediocre performance of task-specific approaches presented in the vast majority of studies has been superseded
by DL approaches that have improved the performance of
component detection as well as fault diagnosis.
To move towards the operationalization of automated
vision-based inspection, we require approaches capable of
detecting a wide variety of components and diagnosing
their faults in order to integrate them into a valuable system. Although ‘‘the component detection is a relatively
mature area’’ (Liu et al. 2020)[p. 10], we found that only a
few articles shed light on detecting several components in a
single approach or pipeline. Besides the identified challenges, we therefore review all available DL-based
approaches that consider more than one component in the
detection step.
The first steps in this field were done by Zhu et al.
(2018), who investigate the cascading of two Faster
R-CNN architectures for high-voltage PLCs. While towers,
spacers, vibration dampers, and insulators are directly
detected from the input image on the first stage, the pixel
coordinates of the tower are used to crop the input image
and consequently feed it into the second stage to detect
small objects – in their case bird nests and tower plates.
Their results show that the cascaded architecture is able to
detect small objects at better performance. Nguyen et al.
(2019) propose a similar approach for low-voltage PLCs

711

(pole, cross-arm, insulator, or top cap) with a large number
of various subcomponents totaling 54 classes. The authors
detect poles in the first stage, crop the respective image and
detect other, smaller components in the second stage. In a
third stage, the recropped components are fed into image
classifiers to perform a fault diagnosis. This work shows
the feasibility of designing a cascaded multistage detection
and classification pipeline utilizing spatial relationships.
However, it does so only for larger components in terms of
pixel size. Liang et al. (2020) take a different approach.
They do not follow the prevalent approach of separating
detection and fault diagnosis, but skip the general detection
of PLCs and directly detect only components that exhibit
faults. While including a total number of ten fault types,
the work naturally states the problem of the detection of
intact components as defective components. It also does
not try to achieve the detection or fault diagnosis of overly
small components.
The aforementioned approaches can strongly facilitate
inspection and thus the prioritization of subsequent maintenance operations. Additionally, the data that is acquired
in an automatic and structured manner can serve as foundation for predictive maintenance (Selcuk 2017). By utilizing the data to train detection models (as shown later in
this work), continuous forecasts about the future occurrence of defects can be issued. A well-trained and deployed
model can, therefore, support experts in indicating future
maintenance needs early and prioritize potential work
orders.
2.4 Image-Based Decision Support Systems
The access to increasing volumes of images and the
capabilities of DL to process and extract information from
images creates the potential to harness this rich data and
DL methods to facilitate effective decision-making
(Chaudhuri and Bose 2020). Despite their capabilities, DL
methods, particularly CNNs, have found limited adoption
in extant research of IS in general (Kraus et al. 2020), and
specifically DSS. Most research performed on image-based
decision support focuses on the medical application
domain (Ben-Cohen et al. 2017; Comaniciu et al. 1999).
However, these works use highly specific medical scans
rather than images from the visible spectrum. Some
examples of the scarce literature on DL-enabled imagebased decision support in non-medical contexts include
vision-based maintenance and monitoring applications or
pattern analysis (Xie et al. 2020; Schumann et al. 2019;
Chaudhuri and Bose 2020; Nazerdeylami et al. 2019;
Jamshidi et al. 2018; Ren et al. 2020).
Despite the efficacy of DL methods for image processing in related decision support contexts, none of the previous work provides guidance on how to design IB-DSS.

123

712

J. P. Landwehr et al.: Design Knowledge for Image-based Decision Support Systems, Bus Inf Syst Eng 64(6):707–728 (2022)

Specifically, although all these studies aim for improved
data and information availability, close to no insight is
provided on how to bridge the gap between the sole image
processing as well as consequent information extraction,
and the respective efficient, high-quality decision-making.
2.5 Synthesis and Research Gap
This work aims to interweave two research domains. It
combines the applied research of image processing in
power line maintenance (PLM) with the need for decision
support in vision-based domains in general and in PLM in
particular. This allows us to tap new potential through
making previously unattainable data and information from
individual images available.
We address this potential by investigating the environment
of automated vision-based PLC maintenance, focusing on the
design of a holistic image-based decision support solution.
We develop design knowledge for IB-DSS and evaluate it by
instantiating a concrete artifact for PLC maintenance. We
extend the reviewed existing works (cf. Table 1) by managing to detect PLCs of extreme size difference (insulators and
safety pins), which we believe is a crucial prerequisite for
moving towards decision support in this domain.

3 Research Methodology
The research at hand develops design knowledge for IBDSS which supports the maintenance decision-making and
planning of maintenance engineers (MEs) for power lines.
Since design science research (DSR) has proven itself to be
not only a suitable but also an important paradigm to
develop IS in general (Gregor and Hevner 2013) and DSS
in particular (Arnott and Pervan 2012), we follow its steps
Fig. 1 Overview of the research
cycles and activities in the
conducted study (based on
Hevner 2007)

123

to develop and evaluate our artifact. At its core, DSR is a
problem solving paradigm that involves two primary and
distinct activities to design solutions to real-world problems: (1) the development of innovative artifacts in a series
of design activities based on a deep understanding of the
problem, justificatory knowledge, and the capabilities of
the researcher and (2) the evaluation of the novel artifact to
assess its ability and utility in solving the identified problem (Hevner et al. 2004). Following this ‘‘build-and-evaluate loop’’ (Hevner et al. 2004), we iteratively develop an
artifact to extend the knowledge base regarding IB-DSS.
Besides this loop – more precisely termed design cycle –
Hevner (2007) describes the existence of two additional
cycles: relevance and rigor. The three cycles are inherently
related and part of any DSR project. The relevance cycle
connects the environment, application domain, or case company of the research project to the design science activities by,
for instance, incorporating input from expert practitioners. It
does not only provide the requirements, problems, or challenges for the research, but also defines acceptance criteria
(Hevner and Chatterjee 2010). The rigor cycle relates the
design science activities to the existing knowledge base. It
provides knowledge from scientific theories, engineering
methods, experience, and expertise to the research project.
The often repeatedly performed design cycle is the core of any
DSR project and naturally builds on the insights from the two
previous cycles. Specifically, during a design cycle the
research iterates between construction and evaluation of an
evolving artifact (Hevner and Chatterjee 2010) to eventually
deploy the artifact in the environment as well as distill insights
and output the research’s design knowledge contributions into
the knowledge base.
In the general view of our research displayed in Fig. 1 we
start with studying the environment in which the research is
embedded. We consequently state our application case

J. P. Landwehr et al.: Design Knowledge for Image-based Decision Support Systems, Bus Inf Syst Eng 64(6):707–728 (2022)

(Sect. 4.1) and review related challenges and problems
(Sect. 4.2). Joining these insights with knowledge from
kernel theories we conceptualize principles and requirements for the problem class of IB-DSS. We subsequently
derive a concrete PLM artifact and, based on Turban et al.
’s (2010) high-level notion of a DSS, first focus on the
model component (MC) of our DSS artifact in the first
design cycle (Sect. 5.2). Afterwards we move to the user
interface component (UIC) in the second design cycle
(Sect. 5.3). To orchestrate the evaluation of our artifact, we
apply and follow the overarching Framework for evaluation
in design science (Venable et al. 2016) to rigorously
demonstrate the utility and efficiency of the artifact and its
underlying design knowledge. Figure 1 provides an overview of the performed evaluation episodes (EE) in these
design cycles. As it is our goal to indicate technical feasibility as well as utility of IB-DSS enabled through DL, we
start with a technical evaluation and then move to a naturalistic context within the application setting.

4 Application Case and Conceptualization
Our DSS artifact, built on images from the visible spectrum, intends to support MEs of power line infrastructure in
their decision-making. More precisely, our system supports
the planning and scoping of individual maintenance orders
for the repair and replacement of components through
improved data and information quality. Because the artifact
is to intervene in an organizational context, it is considered
‘‘socio-technical’’ (Gregor and Hevner 2013). To manage
the complexity of the artifact construction in terms of size
as well as social and technical components, Gregor and
Hevner (2013) suggest the explicit extraction of design
principles (DPs). We therefore conceptualize and suggest a
number of tentative DPs for the design of artifacts of the
problem class of IB-DSS by first investigating challenges
in power line maintenance (PLM). These are recast into a
prescriptive mode with appropriate abstraction yielding
preliminary design requirements (DRs), which then serve
as a basis for deriving the DPs.
4.1 Application Case and Decision Process
As the largest distribution system operator in BadenWürttemberg, Netze BW supplies around 2.2 million customers and operates a network of almost 100,000 km. The
distribution network, which is largely rural, poses challenges in the inspection of towers, poles, and overhead line
routes. Every year, Netze BW operators routinely carry out
around 7000 scheduled inspections of high-voltage towers

713

and lines, which include a visual inspection from the
ground or by helicopter. For around 1400 of these, towers
must be climbed physically. Whenever operators identify
an issue or defect on a tower during these inspections they
manually create a report including the location, description,
and if possible images. Based on these largely unstructured
inspection reports, MEs need to subsequently compile situation-dependent, well-defined, complete, and prioritized
maintenance orders. Accordingly, based on reported incidents MEs first scan the report and verify the priority of the
incident. While the priority determines the processing
order, for any incident several maintenance order specific
details need to be compiled regardlessly. MEs will therefore check the topology surrounding an incident location as
it determines which device and equipment can be used.
Additionally, the incident and its preferred solution
approach determine whether either internal operators can
be dispatched or contractors are required. Another important aspect especially for incidents of lower priority is the
consideration of forthcoming infrastructure revision projects. These can typically include the required maintenance
order and, thus, avoid additional work. Finally, to avoid
hazards during the maintenance work the respective circuits must be free of electrical current which requires
routing the current flow to other power lines. Hence, MEs
need to appropriately terminate these so called switches
based on the incident priority and in close consultation with
the grid control center as well as operators or contractors.
Since the electrical grid often offers small margins for
additional current flow such switches are often times difficult to set up. On this occasion MEs need to bundle
incidents on the same power line to use such switches as
efficiently as possible.
4.2 Challenges in the Power Line Maintenance
To understand PLM from a practitioner as well as a theoretical perspective, we started our research with a series of
expert interviews among the case company’s employees
and a structured literature review (SLR) of domain-specific
articles. The interviewees were chosen based on their their
work experience and affiliation to different departments
dealing with the various aspects of the PLM process (cf.
Table 2). This sampling allowed us to benefit from diverse
viewpoints and nuanced perspectives on the challenges of
PLM with today’s manual inspection.
To guarantee a rigorous overview, we conducted the
SLR following Webster and Watson (2002) and vom
Brocke et al. (2009) by querying various databases (cf.
Table 3). We harnessed a selection of search strings, as
displayed in Table 3, to retrieve the initial set of relevant

123

714

J. P. Landwehr et al.: Design Knowledge for Image-based Decision Support Systems, Bus Inf Syst Eng 64(6):707–728 (2022)

Table 2 Overview of interview
participant to determine
challenges in power line
maintenance

ID

Role

Experience [Years]

Alpha

Senior standardization engineer

10

Beta

Operator of high- and medium-voltage power lines

25

Gamma

Operations manager of high-voltage power lines

28

Delta

Asset manager

12

Table 3 Search strings and respective results for the structured literature review
Search strings

EBSCO

‘‘Automat*’’ AND ‘‘Power line’’ AND ‘‘Inspection’’
‘‘Power line’’ AND ‘‘Quality control’’
‘‘Transmission line’’ AND ‘‘Automat*’’ AND (‘‘Inspection’’ OR ‘‘Monitoring’’)
‘‘Inspection’’ AND (‘‘Power line’’ OR ‘‘Transmission line’’)
(‘‘Power line’’ OR ‘‘Transmission line’’ OR ‘‘Overhead lines’’ OR ‘‘Overhead power lines’’) AND
‘‘Condition monitoring’’
‘‘Challenges’’ AND ‘‘Power line’’ AND ‘‘Inspection’’

articles. To extract only relevant articles, we defined three
exclusion criteria. If the paper examined or investigated
only one specific solution approach for the automation of
PLM, it was excluded. If a paper focused on constant
monitoring of power lines rather than periodic inspection, it
was also excluded. Finally, if on a thorough read of the
paper no challenges regarding PLM were mentioned, the
paper was ruled out. These exclusions allowed us to focus
on review and survey contributions for the automation of
PLM. The SLR conducted in January 2020 resulted in a
large number of potentially relevant contributions as
depicted in Table 3, with 22 papers remaining after the first
exclusion and 18 survey and review papers mentioning
challenges in today’s PLM.
Statements from both the interview transcripts and scientific articles were then coded in an open coding process
and combined in a qualitative content analysis as proposed
by Mayring (1991) to derive a category system of today’s
PLM challenges. Table 4 on page 14 depicts part of the
identified challenges with the respective subchallenges and
their sources. These three challenges (C1–3) appeared to be
specific to our context of infrastructure inspection with its
concrete characteristics being dependent on power line
infrastructure and therefore inform the design of our artifact. Further identified challenges attributed to company
and industry specifics can be found in Sect. A1 within the
Appendix (available online Supplementary material).

WoS

IEEE
Xplore

Scopus

24

79

86

158

4

89

12

141

21

97

213

370

104

393

547

1301

18

131

0

271

2

7

8

24

4.3 Design Requirements
Our DSS artifact intends to support MEs of power line
infrastructure in their planning and scoping of individual
maintenance orders to repair and replace components. To
accomplish this by systematically addressing the aforementioned uncovered challenges in PLM with a visionbased application, we cast these challenges into a prescriptive mode and derive DRs as depicted in Fig. 2.
Consequently, we derive five DRs which describe our
system objectives and confine to which objectives our
subsequently derived design knowledge applies (Walls
et al. 1992). Because we target developing generalized
design knowledge for the problem class of IB-DSS, we
formulate the DRs on the relevant level of abstraction in
the following.
The infrastructure characteristics (C3.1–C3.4) pose
challenges with regard to efficient data capturing as, for
instance, power lines running across valleys or in mountainous areas complicate inspection and hinder data
acquisition. In addition to this, the three inspection types
used in today’s PLM provide heterogeneous condition data
of varying quality (C2.1). Together, these factors result in
the need for an appropriate image quality relating to uniformly captured high-resolution image condition data
regardless of infrastructure characteristics and with process
consistency.
DR1 – Image quality: The system should uniformly
capture condition image data of sufficient quality.

123

J. P. Landwehr et al.: Design Knowledge for Image-based Decision Support Systems, Bus Inf Syst Eng 64(6):707–728 (2022)

715

Table 4 Challenges in the maintenance of power lines based on expert interviews and a structured literature review
ID

Challenge

Subchallenge

Source

C1

Complicating
workplace
characteristics

C1.1–Hazardous work
environment

Pagnano et al. (2013), Nguyen et al. (2018), Jones (2005), Li and Wang (2019),
Seok and Kim (2016), Huang et al. (2018), Toth and Gilpin-Jackson (2010); Alpha;
Beta

C1.2–Strenuous inspection
activities

Alpha

C1.3–Requirement for
broad expertise

Takaya et al. (2019), Pernebayeva and James (2020), Huang et al. (2018); Alpha;
Beta; Gamma; Delta

C1.4–Impact of
subjectivity

Nguyen et al. (2018), Jones (2005), Katrasnik et al. (2010), Toth and GilpinJackson (2010), Homma et al. (2017); Beta; Delta

C2.1–Inspection type
related scope restrictions

Jones (2005), Katrasnik et al. (2010);Beta; Gamma; Delta

C2.2–Requirement for
unscheduled inspections

Matikainen et al. (2016)

C3.1–Age of power line
infrastructure

Aggarwal et al. (2000), Toussaint et al. (2009); Alpha

C3.2–Extent of power line
infrastructure

Pagnano et al. (2013), Aggarwal et al. (2000), Pernebayeva and James (2020),
Huang et al. (2018), Homma et al. (2017); Alpha

C3.3–Topography of
infrastructure territory

Prasad et al. (2016), Deng et al. (2014), Aggarwal et al. (2000), Takaya et al.
(2019), Pernebayeva and James (2020), Matikainen et al. (2016), Seok and Kim
(2016), Huang et al. (2018), Toth and Gilpin-Jackson (2010), Homma et al. (2017)

C3.4–Vast spectrum of
inspection aspects

Nguyen et al. (2018), Prasad et al. (2016), Jones (2005), Homma et al. (2017);
Alpha; Gamma

C2

C3

Inspectability
challenges

Infrastructure
characteristics

Fig. 2 Design knowledge for image-based decision support systems with its respective instantiations

Image data contains large amounts of unstructured information. However, the information contained in an image is
typically of little use if its observer lacks contextual
information. Context allows for a broader understanding of
specific pieces of information and it places them in a bigger
picture by for example providing temporal or geographical
information. Images of the infrastructure and in particular
of components therefore need to be contextualized in an
appropriate way. On the other hand, the infrastructure
characteristics (C3.1–C3.4) pose the requirement for providing infrastructural context to enhance decision-making.

DR2 – Context: The system should capture and provide context.
Today’s inspection process of power line infrastructure is
fully manual and labor-intensive. Above that, various
human-factor-related challenges (C1.1, C1.2, and C1.4)
influence the inspection’s susceptibility to errors. Additionally, characteristics of the infrastructure, such as
topography (C3.2) and extent (C3.3), result in an increased
labor effort for maintenance. To mitigate the limitations of
today’s inspection process, both parts of the process –

123

716

J. P. Landwehr et al.: Design Knowledge for Image-based Decision Support Systems, Bus Inf Syst Eng 64(6):707–728 (2022)

image acquisition and image processing – should be
infused with automation capabilities.
DR3 – Automation: The system should allow for
automatic image acquisition and provide automated
image processing.
To make adequate maintenance decisions in terms of repair
or replacement prioritization, MEs require consistent
condition data. However, just as in any human-based
inspection, the fault diagnosis of power lines is characterized by the personal experience and expertise (C1.3) of the
inspector, making the evaluation or judgment subjective
(C1.4). To objectify the fault diagnosis and making it less
subject to the experiences of a wide variety of inspectors,
personal biases need to be eliminated or harmonized.
Consequently, the analysis of the condition data needs to
build upon equal decision parameters, achieving reproducible results. By reproducibility of results we refer to
similar evaluation or fault diagnosis of a unique PLC
within a range of potentially changing environmental
conditions (e.g., lighting conditions).
DR4 – Reproducibility: The system should provide
image processing in a reproducible manner.
To draw inferences from the previously captured data and
extract crucial information, proper visualization is
required. Consequently, not only the quality but also the
presentation of information regarding faults in the power
line infrastructure are crucial. Specifically, it is important
to integrate and transfer the entire collected data from the
data acquisition and the extracted information from the
data processing into the maintenance decision-making to
enable the compilation of situation-dependent, well-defined, complete, and prioritized maintenance orders.
DR5 – Visualization: The system should support the
process of decision-making with the visualization of
the extracted information.
4.4 Design Principles
In the following, we suggest several design principles
(DPs) which prescribe how to develop the artifact in order
to accomplish our predefined preliminary DRs (Chandra
et al. 2015). The translation process from DRs into tentative DPs is displayed in Fig. 2. The DPs use the knowledge
of several theories in order to meet the DRs. The main
contributions originate from the domains of image processing, DL, DSS, as well as visual data exploration.
We have identified that the images of the PLCs need to
be captured uniformly and with sufficient quality (DR1).
Additionally, the system should capture context (DR2) of
the images for unambiguity regarding their location and

123

time. To address these design requirements, two considerations have to be made: the type and kind of data collected and the collection method, which we will refer to as
platform. The primary type of collected data is predefined
in our use case to be image data from the visual domain as
it (1) provides enough information to detect a wide variety
of common faults (Nguyen et al. 2018) – especially on
PLCs – and (2) allows fast comprehension by MEs. On the
other hand, the platform responsible for the data acquisition
needs to be able to acquire uniform image data. In particular, the platform should be able to combine the advantages
of today’s inspection methods of helicopter-based, groundbased, and climbing-based inspection in a way that each of
these methods that are specifically suitable for different
components can be imitated. The platform is consequently
able to capture images from above, below, and the front
while maintaining a uniform viewing perspective per
component type. The system should also allow data
acquisition to happen in a potentially automated fashion
(DR3) to further increase the scalability and reduce human
involvement in the inspection process.
DP1 – Image acquisition: Provide the system with
(automated) capabilities for uniform acquisition of
images in context.
The system relies on a vision-based approach with captured
images containing information about the infrastructure
condition. The image data should be processed in an
automated and reproducible fashion (DR3 and DR4).
Image processing is necessary to process and analyze the
data in order to extract the desired information. Image
processing has traditionally been implemented for industrial applications like quality control of manufactured parts,
as they exhibit inherently less challenging lighting conditions and scene complexity than outdoor environments
(Mirallès et al. 2014). Owing to the rapid growth and
evolution of DL (Liu et al. 2020; LeCun et al. 2015) in
general and CNNs in particular, there are many successful
approaches that have improved the performance of visual
recognition systems in application areas such as selfdriving cars, face recognition, image search, and image
understanding (Nguyen et al. 2018) despite the challenging
conditions of outdoor application. CNNs provide a method
for automatically learning features in images, which can
drastically reduce the effort in hand-designing solutions
and improve generalization. In summary, this makes its
application promising for the analysis of images containing
PLCs (Jalil et al. 2019; Sampedro Pérez et al. 2019; Prates
et al. 2019). Consequently, based on the assumption that all
relevant components are captured in images, they can be
extracted using DL. In particular, the assessment of a
component’s condition features is determined by two
factors. First, the component needs to be detected in the

J. P. Landwehr et al.: Design Knowledge for Image-based Decision Support Systems, Bus Inf Syst Eng 64(6):707–728 (2022)

717

captured image, containing one or more component
objects. Second, each detected component requires component-specific fault diagnosis. The system should therefore include these two tasks performed by a DL approach.

decision’’. The interpretability of the results of the fault
diagnosis provides MEs with additional information (context) at a PLC level which in turn enhances their ability to
make high-quality decisions.

DP2 – Image processing: Provide the system with
state-of-the art deep learning for the detection and
fault diagnosis of components.

DP4 – Interpretability: Provide the system with
interpretable fault diagnosis.

Images containing PLCs form the basis of the IB-DSS for
vision-based maintenance. However, without any additional information the images can hardly be seen as
sufficient for a system designed for component maintenance. To enable MEs in their decision-making, metadata
(Sen 2004) regarding the images or contained components
is required. The primary purpose of this metadata is to
provide context (DR2) to the reported data and therefore
provide enriching information that leads to knowledge
creation (Nicola 2005). It can describe both physical (e.g.,
towers and insulators) as well as digital objects (e.g.,
images and documents) through providing values or
information for certain characteristics (Clobridge 2010).
The main purpose of attaching metadata to a data item is to
uniquely identify it in a system and to find it by browsing
or searching (Burgin 2016). In the PLM, metadata can
range from geographical and temporal image tags all the
way to geographical location, age, history, et cetera of the
individual infrastructure components. However, the main
consideration to be taken here is that the physical objects,
such as towers, insulators, or conductors, are to be
considered the focal data as they represent the maintained
infrastructure. The captured images contain information
about these components and should therefore be appropriately linked, at best based on the individual component.
DP3 – Metadata: Provide the system with metadata.
The availability of context in the form of simple metadata
such as the geographic location and a time stamp or
advanced/processed metadata such as the object location,
object type, and binary fault presence adds valuable
information to an IB-DSS. However, in terms of context
for the individual fault contained in an image, these details
are of limited help. In the light of fault diagnosis, the
required context (DR2) should be defined as parts of it that
can be accessed to clarify and understand the fault. The
combination of the contextualized fault diagnosis as well as
visualization of the extracted information (DR5) directly
results in necessary interpretability of the decision in the
fault diagnosis. Consequently, the decision of the fault
diagnosis should be interpretable for MEs such that they
are able to comprehend why for instance an insulator was
marked as faulty. Thereby, we adapt the definition of
Miller (2019)[p. 14] referring to interpretability as ‘‘the
degree to which an observer can understand the cause of a

To facilitate decision-making in PLM, we found that
acquired and processed data should be visualized (DR5) to
the respective users in order to determine a fault’s
existence, location, and significance. Because such a user
interface can be considered as the ’’source of many of the
power, flexibility, and ease of use’’ (Turban et al. 2010, p.
100) of a DSS, it requires careful consideration. MEs face a
situation where they need to compile well-defined, complete, and prioritized maintenance orders with a variety of
details and latent information requiring their consideration.
An appropriate interface should therefore harness visual
data exploration (Keim 2002) by integrating its user into
the data exploration process by applying their perceptual
abilities. It can help the personnel to answer the mission
critical questions such as the required equipment and
achieve high decision quality regarding maintenance
prioritization.
DP5 – Visual data exploration: Provide the system
with an interface for visual data exploration.

5 Image-Based Decision Support System for VisionBased Power Line Maintenance
To improve the planning and scoping of individual maintenance orders, enhanced data and information quality
needs to be provided to MEs. By following the prescribed
tentative DPs for an IB-DSS our designed and evaluated
artifact provides evidence of achieving this objective. The
artifact is integrated into our case company by deriving
specific capabilities to satisfy the DPs, termed design features (DFs) (Meth et al. 2015). Accordingly, we present the
image data collection, their subsequent processing and
analysis through the MC, and the presentation of the results
through the UIC along with their respective DFs depicted
in Fig. 2 (cf. page 15) in the following three subsections.
5.1 Image Data Collection
The platform responsible for the image data collection is
required to capture images of sufficient quality. Consequently, it needs to be able to acquire uniform, standardized, and consistent image data in a potentially automated
way (DP1). UAVs equipped with capabilities to capture
optical images (DF1) meet these expectations (Nguyen

123

718

J. P. Landwehr et al.: Design Knowledge for Image-based Decision Support Systems, Bus Inf Syst Eng 64(6):707–728 (2022)

Table 5 Characteristics of the datasets
Dataset

#
Images

Image
resolution

Volume

Annotation
type

#
Annotation

Objective

DSRo

1690

5280 9 3956

15.2
GB

BB ? label

9182

Single-stage component detection (insulator, fittingtop ; fittingbottom ;
birdnest, safetypin); derive data set DS1Co , DS2Fi , and DS3Pi

DS1Co

1589

5280 9 3956

14.3
GB

BB ? label

3996

Multistage large component (insulator, fittingtop ; fittingbottom ;
birdnest) detection

DS2Fi

1820

1200 9 1200

1.2 GB

BB ? label

5186

Multistage small component (safetypin) detection from cropped
fittingtop and fittingbottom

DS3Pi

5186

60 9 60

35.3
MB

Label

5186

safetypin fault diagnosis

et al. 2018; Matikainen et al. 2016; Spencer et al. 2019) for
our specific use case. This is due to three main reasons.
First, UAVs are able to capture images from above, below,
and the front, combining the best aspects of today’s helicopter, ground, and climbing inspection methods. Second,
a UAV’s ability to fly close to power lines allows it to take
detailed images. Finally, although an approach for UAVs’
autonomous navigation and image acquisition along power
lines still has to be developed, the general feasibility of this
automation step is undisputed (Nguyen et al. 2018).
5.2 Deep-Learning-Enabled Model Component
To build an efficient IB-DSS for infrastructure maintenance, images containing relevant components, meaning
components that exhibit faults, need to be identified from
the entire dataset. For this purpose, we present the preparation, instantiation, and evaluation of our MC below.
5.2.1 Data Description and Preparation
To build a DL vision-based MC, large quantities of data are
required. We therefore collected images of PLCs, annotated them according to our desired component classes,
prepared them for training through creation of several
datasets, and finally used them for model training.
The images were collected by flying a UAV along highvoltage power lines in several selected areas in southern
Germany and circling around power towers to take pictures
of PLCs. The power line passages were selected so that the
captured images would contain diverse background scenes
and PLCs of varying age and type. For each power tower,
around 70 images were captured. Images containing faulty
safety pins were created artificially in collaboration with
field experts. Accordingly, an insulator and fitting application was installed in the lower area of one power tower
(see Fig. 3 – left image) and a sequence of 608 images was
captured while modifying the splint itself as well as
changing the respective image perspective.

123

After collecting the images, each one was annotated
with bounding boxes (BBGT ) representing the ground truth.
Each BB was associated with one of five PLC classes
(insulator, fittingtop ; fittingbottom ; birdnest, safetypin) that
we chose for this project. These annotations and the
respective images eventually constituted our root dataset
DSRo , containing 1424 insulators, 1073 fittingstop , 1438
fittingsbottom , 61 birdnests, and 5186 safetypins. Two further datasets DS1Co and DS2Fi were obtained through
subsampling DSRo to train different aspects of the object
detection as depicted in Table 5. Finally, DS3Pi was
derived to train the classifier for safetypins, with 1494
images of defective and 3692 images of intact safetypins.
The characteristics of the four datasets are summarized in
Table 5 and sample images are shown in Figs. 3 and 4 (cf.
page 21).
5.2.2 Instantiation of a Multistage Pipeline
Inspired by Nguyen et al. (2019) and Liu et al. (2020), we
designed a DL-based multistage component detection
(MSCD) and classification pipeline for high-resolution
images containing multisized objects with spatial relationships (DF2 and DF3) to satisfy DP2. This addresses the
requirement for automation (DR3) of infrastructure
inspection (Katrasnik et al. 2010; Montambault et al. 2010
and reproducability (DR4) of the derived results to mitigate
subjective decisions (Katrasnik et al. 2010; Toth and Gilpin-Jackson 2010). While our case company is interested in
the fault diagnosis of a significantly larger number of
components, for the purpose of this study we intend to only
demonstrate the feasibility of detecting both the smallest
components (safetypins), as well as the largest ones (insulators), in images taken of high-voltage power lines – a
topic not yet considered in the automated inspection of
power lines. The pipeline consists of three elements
responsible for different detection and classification tasks,
as displayed in Fig. 5.
In the proposed MSCD pipeline, the (large) component
detector first detects insulator, fittingtop ; fittingbottom ;

J. P. Landwehr et al.: Design Knowledge for Image-based Decision Support Systems, Bus Inf Syst Eng 64(6):707–728 (2022)

Fig. 3 Exemplary images of the DSRo dataset containing insulators
(cyan), fittings (blue and dark blue), birdnest (not present), and
safetypins (pink). The images show various subcomponents of the

719

component types, captured from varying perspectives to ensure the
robustness of the model; the left image provides an impression of the
artificial setup for capturing defective safetypins (color figure online)

Fig. 4 Exemplary images of the safetypin component type from the DS3Pi dataset. The defective safetypins (two to the left) are not completely
bent, while the intact ones (two to the right) are completely bent and consequently prevent slipping out

Fig. 5 Structure of our multistage power line component detection and classification pipeline for high-resolution images

birdnest from an input image. The detected fittings are
cropped from the input image and used as input for the
subsequent (small) component detector to detect safetypins.
The detected safetypins are recropped and passed into the
pin classifier for fault diagnosis.
For the implementation of the MSCD, we chose to
compare two well-proven DL object detection architectures
– SSD (Liu et al. 2016) and Faster R-CNN (Ren et al.
2015) – which we additionally benchmarked against a
single-stage component detection pipeline (SSCD),

meaning all components are detected in one step. We
selected ResNet as the backbone CNN for the object
detection architectures as well as our main classifier for the
fault diagnosis of the safetypins. To compare and benchmark the fault diagnosis, we chose the well-known VGG16
(Simonyan and Zisserman 2015) architecture. In both tasks,
image augmentation was used to improve the generalization of the models. For object detection the brightness of
the images was randomly adjusted. For the classification
task, where cropped images of safetypins were classified,

123

720

J. P. Landwehr et al.: Design Knowledge for Image-based Decision Support Systems, Bus Inf Syst Eng 64(6):707–728 (2022)

we applied horizontal and vertical flipping, random
brightness adjustment, width as well as height range
shifting, and random image blurring.
The component detectors were implemented using the
Tensorflow3 DL framework4 (Abadi et al. 2015) with
models pretrained on the MS COCO dataset (Lin et al.
2014). The image classifiers were realized using the Keras
DL library5 (Chollet et al. 2015) which provides image
classification models pretrained on the ILSVRC dataset
(Russakovsky et al. 2015).
5.2.3 Evaluation of the Instantiated Model Component (EE
I.I & EE I.II)
For the evaluation of DF1–DF3 and DP1 and DP2
respectively, we conducted both an artificial evaluation to
closely assess the pipeline’s efficacy and efficiency as well
as a naturalistic evaluation to generally judge the design’s
acceptance and usefulness. In accordance, the evaluation
episodes were guided by the questions below:
EE I.I How well does the proposed DL-based MC
extract power line components of various sizes? How
well does it diagnose component faults?
EE I.II Do MEs regard the MC’s capabilities as helpful?
Artificial evaluation of the model component (EE I.I)
The efficiency evaluation of the proposed pipelines
required two considerations. First, the pipeline’s ability to
detect the chosen components needed to be evaluated.
Second, the accuracy of the fault diagnosis – which we
performed for detected safetypins – had to be assessed.
Evaluating the efficacy and efficiency of the detection
task in terms of average precision (AP) and mean average
precision (mAP) (Rafael Padilla and da Silva 2020), we
compared our proposed MSCD to the SSCD pipeline. As
we were working with our own proprietary dataset DSRo ,
the available images were split into a training set comprising 80% of the data, with the remaining 20% used for
the evaluation set. To increase the evaluation’s validity,
images captured at one tower were held out from the random split and solely utilized for the evaluation dataset,
while maintaining the split ratio. This image-level split was
kept consistent across the derived datasets DS1Co and
DS2Fi . The SSCD pipeline was fine-tuned to detect the
respective component classes using the DSRo dataset.
Accordingly, both detection stages of the MSCD pipeline
were fine-tuned on DS1Co and DS2Fi respectively. All
models were trained using the stochastic gradient descent
optimizer with 0.0003 (Faster R-CNN) and 0.001 (SSD)
3
4
5

Version 1.15.
In particular, the tensorflow object detection API.
Version 2.3.1.

123

initial learning rate respectively, 0.9 momentum, and batch
size 64. We determined the models by using early stopping
on the validation loss with a patience of 100 for all models.
The testing results of the different pipelines using the different architectures are shown in Fig. 6. The performance
for the safetypin class is disclosed in terms of inter pipeline
performance for both the SSCD and the MSCD pipeline as
well as the intra pipeline performance for solely the MSCD
pipeline.
We evaluated the fault diagnosis task performed for the
safetypins class in terms of weighted precision, weighted
recall, and weighted F1 -score (Pedregosa et al. 2011) to
account for class imbalance. We applied a 3-fold cross
validated grid-search to identify the optimal combination
of parameters. We chose to account for the following
parameter: unfrozen convolutional layers, dense layer size,
optimizer and its respective learning rate, dropout rate, and
batch size. The images in dataset DS3Pi were shuffled, a
hold out set containing 10% of the images was retained and
the remaining images were split into 3 folds. Consequently,
for each grid search configuration three models were
trained with early stopping with patience 30. The best
resulting model of the Resnet and VGG16 model were
harnessed to be evaluated on the retained hold out set. The
results of the evaluation of the cropped safetypin classification task based on the test set are shown in Table 6. All
details on the machine learning steps and choices are
depicted within Sect. A2 in the Appendix (Kühl et al.
2021).
Naturalistic evaluation of the model component (EE
I.II)
To answer whether the detection and fault diagnosis of
PLCs help MEs, we conducted nine purposefully sampled
(Coyne 1997) interviews with potential users of the IBDSS from our case company. The interviewees included
two senior MEs (Epsilon – Zeta) with a working experience of 34 and 41 years, five MEs (Eta – Lambda) with on
average 27 years experience, one operations manager (My)
with 28 years’ working experience, and one senior standardization engineer (Ny) with 10 years’ working experience. Each interviewee received a brief introduction to the
DF1-DF3. Accordingly, the image data collection setup
employing UAVs and the image analysis to detect and
diagnose PLCs was introduced. Exemplary images (cf.
Fig. 3, page 21) were shown to clarify the use case. The
interviewees were allowed to ask questions of comprehension. Subsequently, in a semi-structured interview
fashion each participant was asked to evaluate the DFs. A
detailed overview of the questionnaire can be found in
Appendix A3 on page 40. The question of whether each
presented DF appropriately addresses its respective DPs
served as the starting point. The interviewees opinion and
attitude regarding all DFs was explored and probing

J. P. Landwehr et al.: Design Knowledge for Image-based Decision Support Systems, Bus Inf Syst Eng 64(6):707–728 (2022)
1
0.9

Average precision (AP)

Fig. 6 Average precision of the
different pipelines using Faster
R-CNN and SSD on the five
selected component classes

721

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

i

bn

ftop

MSCD Faster R-CNN

fbottom

spinter

SSCD Faster R-CNN

spintra

mAP

MSCD SSD

SSCD SSD

Table 6 Safetypin crop classifier test results on the DS3Pi dataset
Architecture

AUROC

Weighted precision

Weighted recall

Weighted F1-score

VGG16

0.8114

0.80

0.80

0.78

ResNet50

0.8080

0.76

0.75

0.71

questions were asked if necessary. This allowed us to
assess the attitude of human expert workers towards the
technology. This initial evaluation of part of the IB-DSS’s
tentative design serve as initial mediation to ensure that the
final artifact can be designed as a useful and efficient
instrument for solving our research question.
In accordance with Hevner and Chatterjee ’s (2010)
suggestion for the analysis of confirmatory focus groups
and King ’s (1998) general proposal of template analysis
for textual data, we adapted the approach for the analysis of
the interview transcripts. The artifact’s DPs served as the
initial coding categories.
In general, the interviewees confirmed the usefulness of
the way the image acquisition (DP1) is performed and also
acknowledged the image processing (DP2) to extract
comparable, trustful, and helpful information. They
specifically confirmed the usefulness of the vision-based
approach for capturing a wide variety of different faults.
More significantly, the ability to ‘‘[...] look into the detailed
pictures is already of high value’’ (Iota) since it is easier to
scope maintenance operations from component images
rather than plain table entries. Additionally, the interviewees emphasized the good quality of the images as well as
the improved perspective to view the PLCs and respective
defects, due to the UAVs being able to fly close to the
component of interest. Similarly, the functionality to
automatically analyze the images for components and their

faults was perceived as a major gain and precisely
addressed the request of interviewee Zeta: ‘‘It would
actually be quite interesting if someone or something
evaluates these pictures that the drone captures and then
just sends the damage.’’ The interviewees stressed several
particular factors. First and foremost, the prevention of
subjectivity was mentioned, leading to a uniformity in fault
diagnosis and consequently to a flawless comparability
between faults. Second, besides the presented ability to
detect insulators, fittings, birdnests and safetypins, the
interviewees assumed that several other components could
be added easily. However, in more detail two participants
raised doubts about the system’s ability to recognize severe
incidents such as completely broken and consequently
dangling insulators. Finally, six out of the nine participants
indicated, without being asked, that they felt there were
benefits in using an automated process to extract defective
components. They specifically mentioned benefits regarding timeliness, cost, and performance in comparison to the
current manual inspection methods. However, although the
proposed extraction of faults generated generally positive
feedback, the need to ‘‘comprehend: how did this assessment come about’’ (Ny) was mentioned. Consequently,
both the results and the reasoning of the fault diagnosis
require visualization.

123

722

J. P. Landwehr et al.: Design Knowledge for Image-based Decision Support Systems, Bus Inf Syst Eng 64(6):707–728 (2022)

5.3 User Interface Component
Supporting MEs based on improved data and information
quality requires making them accessible through a UIC. In
the following, we describe the UICs’ design and
evaluation.
5.3.1 Instantiation of the User Interface Component
To create a UIC that accomplishes the preliminary DRs of
visualization (DR5) of the network and related defects
(Shakhatreh et al. 2019), we implemented the artifact
based on the inferred DPs (cf. Fig. 2 on page 15) using
Tableau6 and Javascript. The artifact integrates two data
sources: (1) UAV-captured image data (DP1) and its
according metadata (DP3) as well as (2) metadata about the
physical objects of the power line infrastructure (DP3) at
our case company, such as geographical position or age.
Information that is extracted as part of the image processing (cf. Sect. 5.2) is integrated into the artifact (DP2
and DP4). Finally, these building blocks are arranged in a
meaningful way to support decision-making through visual
data exploration (DP5). Figure 7 depicts the different
views and their interactive links along with the respective
DFs.
To satisfy DP5, the general layout of the UIC should
follow the visual exploration paradigm (Shneiderman
1996) and provide overview first, allow for zoom and filter
capabilities, and then accommodate details on demand. We
base our UIC on four different views which emphasize
different task properties in our multidimensional data and
maximize the availability of explicit and latent information. View (1) provides an operational dashboard view
(DF7) to get a quick and aggregated sense of the condition
of the power line infrastructure. View (2) contains a geographical information system view (DF5) to find and
inspect adjacent infrastructure items and faults. This allows
MEs to explore both the incident location to determine
maintenance order specifics as well as further incidents
which can be bundled. View (3), a list-based view (DF6),
enables MEs to examine a large number of faults regarding
their attributes as well as to find specific faults. This may
help in either bundling incidents, making sourcing decisions upon resource scarcity, or ordering replacement
components. View (4) presents a fault detail view to
inspect particular faults regarding the results of the fault
diagnosis, including properties, specifics, and context. It
consequently enables MEs to assess the faults priority,
judge the skills required for the faults resolutions, and
determine the affected circuit. The interactive visualization
(DF8) allows MEs to directly interact with the

visualizations to obtain and extract the relevant data at the
right time. A persistent filter sidebar with domain-specific
filters provides consistency across the first three views.
While View 1 through 3 already provide different levels of
zoom, the list-based view is the closest to viewing a single
fault. Users are therefore able to filter subsamples of faults
in View 1 as well as 2 and through interactive linking
consequently invoke their display in the list-based View 3.
Finally, detailed information on a particular fault identified
either in View 2 or 3 can be examined. Images of the
defective component are available in a gallery. To address
DP4, the gallery provides the user with visual fault
explanations (DF4) of the component for improved interpretability of the fault diagnosis. In particular, the detected
defective component is framed by a bounding box for
convenient localization. Additionally, based on the type of
fault either a segmentation mask (for insulators) or a heat
map (for splints) is visualized. Besides the image gallery,
the user is able to expand related information showing
other faults on the power tower and the fault timeline of the
power tower. As a summary, a video demonstration of the
user interface shows all described views in detail.7
5.3.2 Evaluation of the User Interface Component (EE II)
For the evaluation of our UIC, we applied a qualitative
evaluation to test the proof of applicability in the realworld context and to assess the usefulness as well as efficiency. In particular we aimed to answer the evaluation
question:
EE
II

To answer this question, we remotely8 conducted nine
one-on-one, confirmatory workshops with the same participants already questioned in EE I.II over the company’s
collaboration platform. This confirmatory evaluation
approach was chosen for two reasons. First, the flexibility
of the method enabled us to adapt the procedure if necessary. Second, each user was able to individually explore
and use the prototype in their accustomed work setting,
which allowed the integration into the user’s working
routine and ensured that the artifact and its capabilities
were understood unambiguously.
For each workshop, we initially introduced the intent of
the UIC. We subsequently started a screen sharing session
and asked each participant to explore and use the UIC and
verbalize their thoughts. Whenever appropriate, the
researcher enriched the participant’s experience by
7

6

https://www.tableau.com/.

123

Does the instantiated UIC support MEs in making
improved decisions about planning and scoping
individual maintenance orders?

8

https://youtu.be/Y3oIJghtRT4.
Due to COVID-19.

J. P. Landwehr et al.: Design Knowledge for Image-based Decision Support Systems, Bus Inf Syst Eng 64(6):707–728 (2022)

View 1

723

View 3

DF6
DF7
DF8

DF8

Detail view 4

View 2

DF4
DF5

DP2 – Image processing

DP3 – Metadata

DP4 – Interpretability

DP5 – Visual data exploration

Fig. 7 Structure of our user interface with its different views and the transitions between the views

providing information about the DFs. Afterwards, each
participant was asked to fill out a survey based on Davis ’s
(1989) technology acceptance model (TAM). Finally, the
participant was asked to evaluate whether the presented
artifact addresses its decisive DPs during a semi-structured
interview. The question of whether each presented DF
appropriately addresses its respective DPs served as the
starting point. The transcripts of the workshops were analyzed in analogy to E I.II, using template analysis by King
(1998).
The survey results as well as the results from our
qualitative evaluation indicate that our instantiated artifact
is able to support MEs in their decision-making regarding
PLCs. While our TAM survey comprising the nine interviewed experts cannot claim significance, it suggests the
tool’s usefulness as the perceived usefulness averaged 6.2
on a 7-point Likert scale. In accordance, the interviews
revealed that the artifact would support the MEs in their
everyday work by enhancing the availability of data and
information of the power line infrastructure and the
appropriate arrangement of the information. The confirmatory workshops therefore showed that the underlying
design knowledge is suitable, useful, and effective for
developing IB-DSS artifacts aimed at the vision-based
maintenance of infrastructure.
In particular, the participants mentioned that the IB-DSS
allows fast and convenient visual data exploration (DP5)
while being helpful to experienced workers as well as (and
especially) those in training. The interviewed experts

mentioned that the artifacts’ capabilities for overview,
interactive zooming, and interactive filtering are the main
facilitators for convenient exploration. The interactive
zooming across the multiple views makes latent information, for example staggering faults on one passage or the
circumstances around a tower, visually available. Finally,
the filter capabilities support finding relevant faults, as
‘‘[one] can filter out the unimportant ones’’ (Eta). However,
six participants requested additional filters based on further
metadata concerning the components in the infrastructure.
While the available metadata (DP3) regarding towers and
their identified faults was perceived as a good starting
point, all participants mentioned further data which could
be integrated: fault-related workflow tracking metadata as
well as component-related material and reordering metadata. The participants also recognized that the visual fault
explanations could mainly help them localize faults significantly faster as well as develop a thorough comprehension and understanding of the fault. Specifically, it was
mentioned that the easier localization could reduce the
workload and accelerate the root cause analysis. On the
downside, it could hinder independent examination of the
images in the long run. The image augmentations consequently provide fault interpretability (DP4). Most significantly, all participants acknowledged that the IB-DSS is
especially suitable for improved maintenance decisionmaking, as they would be able to ‘‘work more efficiently,
simply work more or even combine activities’’ (Epsilon).
In fact, besides the planning and scoping of individual

123

724

J. P. Landwehr et al.: Design Knowledge for Image-based Decision Support Systems, Bus Inf Syst Eng 64(6):707–728 (2022)

maintenance orders, the improved data and information
availability and quality enhance four key decision-making
tasks: finding and discovering systematic faults (Epsilon,
Iota, Lambda), combining maintenance orders (Eta, Epsilon, Kappa), discussing maintenance budget (My, Iota,
Ny), and scoping and planning long-term restoration projects (My, Kappa).

6 Discussion
In this section we depict the contributions and limitations
of our work and present an outlook regarding PLC
inspection and maintenance.
6.1 Contributions
Our results imply that our instantiated IB-DSS enables
maintenance engineers to make better, more informed
decisions about repairing or replacing PLCs by means of
improved data and information quality.
More generally, this suggests that the rich information
from uniformly acquired images extracted through deeplearning-based image processing capabilities combined
with contextual information of metadata and interpretability provided by visual data exploration is a valuable
solution to the information intensive context of maintenance and monitoring applications. Figure 8 depicts the
schematic layout of these aspects. Consequently, we
hypothesize that our derived knowledge provides a nascent
design theory for the still underresearched class of IB-DSS.
This design knowledge might be particularly valuable for
creating automated decision support systems in information-intensive contexts where decision-makers largely rely
on unstructured vision-based image data. This in turn
would increase the quality of decision both in terms of
efficiency and effectiveness (Kraus et al. 2020).

The schematic layout of our conceptualized design
principles, as depicted in Fig. 8, therefore provides prescriptive knowledge that may serve as a blueprint (Gregor
and Jones 2007) to develop similar systems for visionbased applications.
In our specific use case of PLC inspection, the proposed
IB-DSS relying on UAV generated images can provide
multiple benefits compared with the status quo. It can
prevent accidents since hazardous inspection methods like
tower-climbing are no longer necessary – as the inspection
of the towers is now performed by unmanned UAVs. While
no coherent numbers are available within Europe, recent
reports from the US demonstrate that power line work is
listed among top 10 most dangerous jobs. Each year, over
40 power line workers receive fatal injuries resulting from
falling or electrocution (Schwarz and Drudi 2018). While
certainly only a share of these workers die during inspection activities (rather than the repair activity itself), it is
desirable to save every life possible. The non-fatal injuries
amount to 1200 per year in the US (Schwarz and Drudi
2018) and the typical reasons are falling, slipping and
tripping. We also expect significant reduction of injuries in
this area, once automation of inspection is implemented.
Currently, the data that MEs work with are tables of
compiled inspection reports with heterogeneous assessments of a distributed workforce. The standardized data
acquisition and processing results in (1) more reliable and
(2) more structured data. Combined with the benefits of a
unified interface that provides metadata and latent, information maintenance decisions are fully comprehensible.
In total, the participants of the confirmatory workshop
affirmed that the IB-DSS enhances their decision-making
substantially. As mentioned by Epsilon, Theta, Kappa, and
My, besides the pure planning of maintenance orders the
artifact could moreover be utilized for other tasks, like the
combination of maintenance orders or the planning of longterm restoration projects.

Fig. 8 Schematic layout of the
design principles of imagebased decision support systems
Metadata
component

DP3
Metadata

DP4
Interpretability

123

(Image) Data component

Model component

User interface component

DP1
Image acquisition

DP2
Image processing

DP5
Visual data
exploration

J. P. Landwehr et al.: Design Knowledge for Image-based Decision Support Systems, Bus Inf Syst Eng 64(6):707–728 (2022)

Automated Asset Inspection

Manual Asset Inspection

Strategic value for the company

725

Automated Aerial,
e.g., drones with
automated routing and
image capturing
capabilities

Condition-based
Maintenance, e.g.,
image-based decision
support system based
on automated aerial
condition for work
order planning

Predictive
Maintenance, e.g.,
leveraging machine
learning models for
estimating prediction
needs in the future

Manual Aerial, e.g.,
human-piloted planes
or helicopters

On premise, e.g.,
physical inspection on
foot or via tower
climbing

Maintenance Maturity

Fig. 9 Road map towards predictive maintenance

6.2 Limitations
While meeting Gregor and Jones ’s (2007) six common
criteria for design theories, our design knowledge for IBDSS carries limitations that open opportunities for future
research. Our research can only be generalized to a limited
extent because it was conducted at one company in the
power line infrastructure domain and focused on a selection of defect cases. While we can claim some generalization by supporting our design through kernel theories
and other studies, further IB-DSS should be developed for
other use cases and in other domains to extend and consolidate the design theory. Furthermore, our research lacks
quantification of the effect on the field efficiency of the
image processing. Quantitative studies in this regard could
be conducted to benchmark the artifact’s effects in terms of
performance of automated versus manual image
processing.
6.3 Future Design Activities
Within our presented research, we showed novel ways to
design condition-based maintenance systems. More precisely, we utilized images captured by UAVs which were
subsequently automatically analyzed and included within
an image-based decision support system. Figure 9 shows a
possible general road map demonstrating increasing
maintenance maturity, with the next evolutionary step
being to use the data as well as the generated models not

only as a basis for maintenance order planning, but
moreover to predict maintenance needs for the (distant)
future, i.e., predictive maintenance.
In regard to the practical aspects at the case company,
the artifact is currently prepared for a broader implementation and deployment into the business. For these steps,
the solution is containerized (Rufino et al. 2017) to allow
for flexible and scalable applications. An expert team
analyzes the different possibilities of automated UAV
routing (Avellar et al. 2015) to allow for a continuous and
correct collection of the required data. Meanwhile, experts
are being educated on the possibilities of integrating the
tool into their current day-to-day processes, supported by
an expert for change management of industrial business
processes (Bokrantz et al. 2020). One remaining challenge
is the aspect of data storage and management, e.g., within a
data warehouse. On the basis of the required data volume
shown in Table 5 on page 20, we estimate a total volume of
images for a one-time acquisition of the complete network
of our case company of 9 TB. How often this data has to be
refreshed and how precisely it is stored (e.g., hybrid cloud)
needs to be discussed for future iterations of the artifact.
In a broader context, the automated inspection of PLCs
will be an important, yet only intermediate step for PLC
maintenance in the future. The image data used in this
work can be combined with multiple additional data
sources such as weather and location characteristics (e.g.,
sun exposure and topology). The inclusion of additional
sources of information can enable an accurate prediction of

123

726

J. P. Landwehr et al.: Design Knowledge for Image-based Decision Support Systems, Bus Inf Syst Eng 64(6):707–728 (2022)

future maintenance needs which further facilitate effective
planning and resource utilization.

7 Conclusion
Planning and preparing maintenance orders in power line
maintenance is a challenging task for maintenance engineers, as they must rely on human-created, heterogeneous,
and largely unstructured information. These characteristics
make the process both time-intensive and costly, which can
adversely affect the continuous supply of electricity. As
most research on power line maintenance focuses on
automated inspection through UAV-captured images and
deep learning, there is an apparent gap in literature for
transferring the acquired data into maintenance decisionmaking.
Following the design science research guidelines, we
designed, developed, and evaluated an artifact to address
this research gap. Initially, we rigorously analyzed the
challenges in power line maintenance. Building on these,
we conceptualized design principles for an image-based
decision support system that integrates the capabilities of
deep learning to extract faulty components from a set of
captured images and appropriately presents the information
to relevant users. Accordingly, we implement our design
principles in an exemplary artifact. The evaluation using a
technical experiment as well as two qualitative evaluation
episodes with long-standing experts indicates the utility of
our design knowledge and can therefore inform future
system designs of similar nature.

Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt
DEAL.

Supplementary Information The online version contains
supplementary material available at https://doi.org/10.1007/s12599022-00745-z.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate
if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.

123

References
Abadi M et al (2015) TensorFlow: large-scale machine learning on
heterogeneous systems. http://tensorflow.org/, software available
from http://tensorflow.org. Accessed 17 Nov 2021
Aggarwal R, Johns A, Jayasinghe J, Su W (2000) An overview of the
condition monitoring of overhead lines. Electr Power Syst Res
53(1):15–22
Akhloufi M, Benmesbah N (2014) Outdoor ice accretion estimation of
wind turbine blades using computer vision. In: 2014 Canadian
conference on computer and robot vision. IEEE, pp 246–253
Arnott D, Pervan G (2012) Design science in decision support
systems research: an assessment using the Hevner, March, Park,
and Ram guidelines. J Assoc Inf Syst 13:923–949
Avellar GS, Pereira GA, Pimenta LC, Iscold P (2015) Multi-UAV
routing for area coverage and remote sensing with minimum
time. Sensors 15(11):27783–27803
Baladi GY, Dawson T, Musunuru G, Prohaska M, Thomas K et al
(2017) Pavement performance measures and forecasting and the
effects of maintenance and rehabilitation strategy on treatment
effectiveness. Tech. rep., United States. Federal Highway
Administration
Ben-Cohen A, Klang E, Diamant I, Rozendorn N, Raskin SP, Konen
E, Amitai MM, Greenspan H (2017) CT image-based decision
support system for categorization of liver metastases into
primary cancer sites: initial results. Acad Radiol
24(12):1501–1509
Bharati P, Pramanik A (2020) Deep learning techniques—R-CNN to
mask R-CNN: a survey. In: Computational intelligence in pattern
recognition. Springer, Heidelberg, pp 657–668
Bokrantz J, Skoogh A, Berlin C, Wuest T, Stahre J (2020) Smart
maintenance: a research agenda for industrial maintenance
management. Int J Prod Econ 224(107):547
Brynjolfsson E, Mcafee A (2017) The business of artificial intelligence. Harvard Bus Rev 1:1–20
Burgin M (2016) Theory of knowledge: structures and processes.
World Scientific, Singapore
Chandra L, Seidel S, Gregor S (2015) Prescriptive knowledge in is
research: Conceptualizing design principles in terms of materiality, action, and boundary conditions. In: Proceedings of the
annual Hawaii international conference on system sciences.
pp 4039–4048
Chatterjee S, Brendel AB, Lichtenberg S (2018) Smart infrastructure
monitoring: Development of a decision support system for
vision-based road crack detection. In: International conference
on information systems 2018, ICIS 2018 (October)
Chaudhuri N, Bose I (2020) Exploring the role of deep neural
networks for post-disaster decision support. Decis Support Syst
130(113):234
Chollet F et al (2015) Keras. https://keras.io. Accessed 17 Nov 2021
Clobridge A (2010) 5-Metadata. In: Clobridge A (ed) Building a
digital repository program with limited resources, Chandos
information professional series. pp 85–109
Comaniciu D, Meer P, Foran DJ (1999) Image-guided decision
support system for pathology. Mach Vis Appl 11(4):213–224
Coyne IT (1997) Sampling in qualitative research. Purposeful and
theoretical sampling; merging or clear boundaries? J Adv Nurs
26(3):623–630
Davis FD (1989) Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and
user acceptance of information technology. MIS Q
13(3):319–340
Deng C, Wang S, Huang Z, Tan Z, Liu J (2014) Unmanned aerial
vehicles for power line inspection: a cooperative way in
platforms and communications. JCM 9:687–692

J. P. Landwehr et al.: Design Knowledge for Image-based Decision Support Systems, Bus Inf Syst Eng 64(6):707–728 (2022)
Gibert X, Patel VM, Chellappa R (2017) Deep multitask learning for
railway track inspection. IEEE Trans Intell Transp Syst
18(1):153–164. https://doi.org/10.1109/TITS.2016.2568758
Gleave SD, Frisoni R, Dionori F, Casullo L, Vollath C, Devenish L,
Spano F, Sawicki T, Carl S, Lidia R, Neri J, Silaghi R,
Stanghellini A (2014) EU road surfaces: economic and safety
impact of the lack of regular road maintenance–study. Tech. rep
Gonzalez R, Woods R (2018) Digital image processing. Pearson,
London
Goodfellow I, Bengio Y, Courville A (2016) Deep learning. MIT
Press. http://www.deeplearningbook.org, Accessed 17 Nov 2021
Gopalakrishnan M, Bokrantz J, Ylipää T, Skoogh A (2015) Planning
of maintenance activities—a current state mapping in industry.
Procedia CIRP 30:480–485
Gregor S, Hevner A (2013) Positioning and presenting design science
research for maximum impact. MIS Q 37:337–356
Gregor S, Jones D (2007) The anatomy of a design theory. J Assoc Inf
Syst 8(5):312–335
Griebel M, Dürr A, Stein N (2019) Applied image recognition:
guidelines for using deep learning models in practice. In:
Proceedings of the 14th international conference on
Wirtschaftsinformatik
He K, Zhang X, Ren S, Sun J (2015a) Deep residual learning for
image recognition. In: 2016 IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition (CVPR)
He K, Zhang X, Ren S, Sun J (2015b) Delving deep into rectifiers:
surpassing human-level performance on ImageNet classification.
In: IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision,
pp 1026–1034
Hevner A (2007) A three cycle view of design science research.
Scand J Inf Syst 19:4
Hevner A, Chatterjee S (2010) Design science research in information
systems, vol 28. Springer, Berlin, pp 9–22
Hevner AR, March ST, Park J, Ram S (2004) Design science in
information systems research. MIS Q 28:75
Homma RZ, Cosentino A, Szymanski C (2017) Autonomous
inspection in transmission and distribution power lines–methodology for image acquisition by means of unmanned aircraft
system and its treatment and storage. CIRED Open Access Proc
J 2017(1):965–967
Huang L, Xu D, Zhai D (2018) Research and design of space-skyground integrated transmission line inspection platform based on
artificial intelligence. In: IEEE conference on energy internet
and energy system integration (EI2). pp 1–4
Hui X, Bian J, Zhao X, Tan M (2018) Vision-based autonomous
navigation approach for unmanned aerial vehicle transmissionline inspection. Int J Adv Robot Syst 2018:1–15
Jalil B, Leone G, Martinelli M, Moroni D, Pascali M, Berton A (2019)
Fault detection in power equipment via an unmanned aerial
system using multi modal data. Sens 19:3014
Jamshidi A, Hajizadeh S, Su Z, Naeimi M, Núñez A, Dollevoet R,
Schutter BD, Li Z (2018) A decision support approach for
condition-based maintenance of rails based on big data analysis.
Transp Res Part C Emerg Technol 95:185–206
Janiesch C, Zschech P, Heinrich K (2021) Machine learning and deep
learning. Electron Market. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12525-02100475-2. Accessed 17 Nov 2021
Jardine AK, Lin D, Banjevic D (2006) A review on machinery
diagnostics and prognostics implementing condition-based maintenance. Mech Syst Signal Process 20(7):1483–1510
Jones D (2005) Power line inspection—a UAV concept. p 8
Katrasnik J, Pernus F, Likar B (2010) A survey of mobile robots for
distribution power line inspection. IEEE Trans Power Deliv
25(1):485–493
Keim DA (2002) Information visualization and visual data mining.
IEEE Trans Vis Comput Graph 8(1):1–8

727

King N (1998) Template analysis. In: Symon G, Cassell C (eds)
Qualitative methods and analysis in organizational research: a
practical guide. Sage Publications Ltd., pp 118–134
Kraus M, Feuerriegel S, Oztekin A (2020) Deep learning in business
analytics and operations research: models, applications and
managerial implications. Eur J Oper Res 281(3):628–641
Kühl N, Hirt R, Baier L, Schmitz B, Satzger G (2021) How to conduct
rigorous supervised machine learning in information systems
research: the supervised machine learning report card. Commun
Assoc Inf Syst 48(1):46
LeCun Y, Bengio Y, Hinton G (2015) Deep learning. Nature
521:436–44
Li D, Wang X (2019) The future application of transmission line
automatic monitoring and deep learning technology based on
vision. In: 2019 IEEE 4th international conference on cloud
computing and big data analysis (ICCCBDA). pp 131–137
Liang H, Zuo C, Wei W (2020) Detection and evaluation method of
transmission line defects based on deep learning. IEEE Access
8:38448–38458
Lin TY et al (2014) Microsoft coco: common objects in context.
Comput Vis ECCV 2014:740–755
Liu W, Anguelov D, Erhan D, Szegedy C, Reed S, Fu CY, Berg AC
(2016) SSD: single shot multibox detector. LNCS, pp 21–37
Liu X, Miao X, Jiang H, Chen J (2020) Review of data analysis in
vision inspection of power lines with an in-depth discussion of
deep learning technology. CoRR arXiv:2003.09802
March ST, Smith GF (1995) Design and natural science research on
information technology. Decis Support Syst 15(4):251–266
Matikainen L, Lehtomäki M, Ahokas E, Hyyppä J, Karjalainen M,
Jaakkola A, Kukko A, Heinonen T (2016) Remote sensing
methods for power line corridor surveys. J Photogram Remote
Sens 119:10–31
Mayring P (1991) Qualitative inhaltsanalyse. In: Flick U, Kardoff Ev,
Keupp H, Rosenstiel Lv, Wolff S (eds) Handbuch qualitative
Forschung: Grundlagen, Konzepte, Methoden und Anwendungen. pp 209–213
Meth H, Mueller B, Maedche A (2015) Designing a requirement
mining system. J Assoc Inf Syst 16:799–837
Miller T (2019) Explanation in artificial intelligence: insights from
the social sciences. Artif Intell 267:1–38
Mirallès F, Pouliot N, Montambault S (2014) State-of-the-art review
of computer vision for the management of power transmission
lines. In: Proceedings of the 2014 3rd international conference
on applied robotics for the power industry. pp 1–6
Montambault S, Beaudry J, Toussaint K, Pouliot N (2010) On the
application of VTOL UAVs to the inspection of power utility
assets. In: 2010 1st international conference on applied robotics
for the power industry. pp 1–7
Nazerdeylami A, Majidi B, Movaghar A (2019) Smart coastline
environment management using deep detection of manmade
pollution and hazards. In: 2019 5th conference on knowledge
based engineering and innovation (KBEI). pp 332–337
Nguyen VN, Jenssen R, Roverso D (2018) Automatic autonomous
vision-based power line inspection: a review of current status
and the potential role of deep learning. Int J Electr Power Energ
Syst 99:107–120
Nguyen V, Jenssen R, Roverso D (2019) Intelligent monitoring and
inspection of power line components powered by UAVs and
deep learning. IEEE Power Energ Technol Syst J 6:11–21
Nicola H, Kappeler U-P, Daniela N, Thomas S, Matthias G (2005)
Benefits of integrating meta data into a context model. In: Third
IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing and
Communications Workshops. IEEE, pp 25–29
Pagnano A, Höpf M, Teti R (2013) A roadmap for automated power
line inspection. Maintenance and repair. Procedia CIRP
12:234–239

123

728

J. P. Landwehr et al.: Design Knowledge for Image-based Decision Support Systems, Bus Inf Syst Eng 64(6):707–728 (2022)

Pedregosa F et al (2011) Scikit-learn: machine learning in Python.
J Mach Learn Res 12:2825–2830
Pernebayeva D, James AP (2020) Deep-learning-based approach for
outdoor electrical insulator inspection. pp 81–88
Prasad PS, Rao BP, Ece UJKAI (2016) Review on machine vision
based insulator inspection systems for power distribution system.
J Eng Sci Technol Rev 9:135–141
Prates RM, Cruz R, Marotta AP, Ramos RP, Filho EFS, Cardoso JS
(2019) Insulator visual non-conformity detection in overhead
power distribution lines using deep learning. Comput Electr Eng
78:343–355
Quintana M, Torres J, Menéndez JM (2016) A simplified computer
vision system for road surface inspection and maintenance. IEEE
Trans Intell Transp Syst 17(3):608–619. https://doi.org/10.1109/
TITS.2015.2482222
Rafael Padilla SLN, da Silva EAB (2020) Survey on performance
metrics for object-detection algorithms. In: 2020 International
conference on systems, signals and image processing (IWSSIP)
Ren S, He K, Girshick R, Sun J (2015) Faster r-CNN: towards realtime object detection with region proposal networks
Ren M, Vu HQ, Li G, Law R (2020) Large-scale comparative
analyses of hotel photo content posted by managers and
customers to review platforms based on deep learning: implications for hospitality marketers. J Hosp Market Manag 30(1):1–24
Rufino J, Alam M, Ferreira J, Rehman A, Tsang KF (2017)
Orchestration of containerized microservices for IIoT using
docker. In: 2017 IEEE international conference on industrial
technology (ICIT). IEEE, pp 1532–1536
Russakovsky O et al (2015) Imagenet large scale visual recognition
challenge. Int J Comput Vis 115(3):211–252
Sampedro Pérez C, Rodriguez-Vazquez J, Rodrı́guez Ramos A,
Carrio A, Campoy P (2019) Deep learning-based system for
automatic recognition and diagnosis of electrical insulator
strings. IEEE Access 7:101283–101308
Schumann A, Mood N, Mungofa P, MacEachern C, Zaman Q, Esau T
(2019) Detection of three fruit maturity stages in wild blueberry
fields using deep learning artificial neural networks. In: 2019
American society of agricultural and biological engineers annual
international meeting
Schwarz M, Drudi D (2018) Workplace hazards facing line installers
and repairers. Mon Lab Rev 141:1–13
Selcuk S (2017) Predictive maintenance, its implementation and latest
trends. Proc Inst Mech Eng Part B J Eng Manuf
231(9):1670–1679. https://doi.org/10.1177/0954405415601640
Sen A (2004) Metadata management: past, present and future. Decis
Support Syst 37(1):151–173
Seok KH, Kim YS (2016) A state of the art of power transmission line
maintenance robots. J Electr Eng Technol 11:1412–1422
Shakhatreh H, Sawalmeh AH, Al-Fuqaha A, Dou Z, Almaita E,
Khalil I, Othman NS, Khreishah A, Guizani M (2019)
Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs): a survey on civil applications
and key research challenges. IEEE Access 7:48572–48634
Shihavuddin AS, Chen X, Fedorov V, Christensen AN, Riis NAB,
Branner K, Dahl AB, Paulsen RR (2019) Wind turbine surface
damage detection by deep learning aided drone inspection
analysis. Energies 12(4):1–15
Shneiderman B (1996) The eyes have it: a task by data type taxonomy
for information visualizations. In: Proceedings IEEE symposium
on visual languages. pp 336–343

123

Simonyan K, Zisserman A (2015) Very deep convolutional networks
for large-scale image recognition. In: 3rd International conference on learning representations, ICLR 2015, San Diego, CA,
USA, May 7–9, 2015, conference track proceedings
Spencer BF, Hoskere V, Narazaki Y (2019) Advances in computer
vision-based civil infrastructure inspection and monitoring.
Engineering 5(2):199–222
Szeliski R (2010) Computer vision: algorithms and applications.
Springer, Heidelberg. https://doi.org/10.4324/978042904252210
Takaya K, Ohta H, Kroumov V, Shibayama K, Nakamura M (2019)
Development of UAV system for autonomous power line
inspection. In: International conference on system theory, control
and computing. pp 762–767
Toth J, Gilpin-Jackson A (2010) Smart view for a smart grid—
unmanned aerial vehicles for transmission lines. In: 2010 1st
international conference on applied robotics for the power
industry. pp 1–6
Toussaint K, Pouliot N, Montambault S (2009) Transmission line
maintenance robots capable of crossing obstacles: state-of-theart review and challenges ahead. J Field Robot 26(5):477–499
Turban E, Sharda R, Delen D (2010) Decision support and business
intelligence systems, 9th edn. USA
Venable J, Pries-Heje J, Baskerville R (2016) Feds: a framework for
evaluation in design science research. Eur J Inf Syst 25(1):77–89
vom Brocke J, Simons A, Niehaves B, Riemer K, Plattfaut R, Cleven
A (2009) Reconstructing the giant: on the importance of rigour
in documenting the literature search process. In: ECIS 2009
proceedings
Walls JG, Widmeyer GR, El Sawy OA (1992) Building an
information system design theory for vigilant EIS. Inf Syst Res
3:36–59
Webster J, Watson R (2002) Analyzing the past to prepare for the
future: Writing a literature reviewd. MIS Q 26:xiii–xxiii
Wei X, Yang Z, Liu Y, Wei D, Jia L, Li Y (2019) Railway track
fastener defect detection based on image processing and deep
learning techniques: a comparative study. Eng Appl Artif Intell
80:66–81. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2019.01.008
Winter R (2008) Design science research in Europe. EJIS 17:470–474
Xie Y, Noguchi R, Ahamed T (2020) Deep learning and multiple
sensors data acquisition system for real-time decision analysis in
agriculture using unmanned aerial vehicle. EasyChair Preprint
no. 2690
Yang Y, Wang L, Wang Y, Mei X (2019) Insulator self-shattering
detection: a deep convolutional neural network approach.
Multimed Tools Appl 78(8):10097–10112
Zhai Y, Chen R, Yang Q, Li X, Zhao Z (2018) Insulator fault
detection based on spatial morphological features of aerial
images. IEEE Access 6:35316–35326
Zhu X, Kong L, Wang G, Hu Z, Li S (2018) Multi-size object
detection assisting fault diagnosis of power systems based on
improved cascaded faster R-CNNs. In: Jiang X, Hwang JN (eds)
Tenth international conference on digital image processing
(ICDIP 2018), international society for optics and photonics, vol
10806. pp 342–351

